In this video we'll see how we can use abstract classes as interfaces in C++ and interface class and
C++ is a class that has only pure virtual functions.
These functions provide a general set of services that users of the class can use in order to be useful.
These pure virtual functions must be declared as public.
Any class that wants to be a concrete class and support the interface provided by the interface class
can override the pure virtual functions and implement these services as needed.
Remember every service must be implemented and C++ will strictly enforced type information.
So when overriding the function prototypes must match exactly.
Unlike Java C-Sharp and other languages C++ does not provide a specific keyword or way to create an
interface as part of the C++ core language.
So in C++ we use abstract classes with pure virtual functions to achieve the concept of an interface.
Suppose we want to be able to provide any user defined object.
The ability to be printed on a stream like C out we can do this by creating a printable interface class
that provides the service in terms of a pure virtual function and then our user defined classes can
simply be derived from printable and override this pure virtual function.
Let's see an example here you can see that we have a class named printable and it has a pure virtual
function named print.
This makes this class an abstract class.
The printable class also adds a friend function that will use to allow us to print any type of object
that conforms to this interface.
You can see that the overloaded operator function.
You can see the overloaded operator function at the bottom of the screen and it calls RBJ.
Print this would dynamically bind to the print function of whatever object type was passed in.
Since we know that that object is printable and we have a reference to it that's pretty powerful stuff.
At the end of the slides we'll head over to the idea and I'll show you how we can use this interface
with the account hierarchy as well as with non-A account classes.
So for any class to be printable it must be derived from printable and it must override the pure virtual
function print that's in the printable interface.
That's it.
So in this case you can see that any class is derived from printable and it does override the print
pure virtual function.
Now any class is a printable.
So let's create some any class objects and print them.
First we create TR as a point to 20 class and create an any class object then we dereference the pointer
to get that object and we use it in an output statement.
This will call the overloaded insertion operator which will in turn call the function print of any class
and this will display.
Hi from any class.
Now suppose we have two functions function one in function to function one expects in any class object
by reference and function 2 expects a printable object by reference.
Well we can call both these functions in passing the object Peachi are pointing to.
Why.
Because that object is an instance of any class and because that object is a printable.
In both cases we get the same output.
The print function in any class is bound dynamically.
Let's see another example.
Here we have a shape class that only has pure virtual functions so it's an abstract class and it can
also be used as an interface class.
What we're saying is if you want to be a concrete shape then you must be derived from shape and you
must override the draw and the rotate pure virtual functions.
So let's do that.
Here we declare a circle class derived from the shape class.
We know that if we want a circle to be a concrete class then we must override draw and rotate and that's
exactly what we're doing in this example.
Sometimes you'll see classes that are intended to be used as interface classes named with a capital
i.e. preceding the host name.
This makes it easy to know just by the name that the class is intended to be used as an interface.
As you can see in this example shape was renamed to ice shape.
Now when you see circle being derived from ICE shape you know that shape is intended as an interface
class.
This isn't a requirement but you tend to see that out there so we can now use pointers to shape objects
to use dynamic polymorphism.
Here we create a vector of pointers to shape objects and then we create three pointers and initialized
them to point to three different types of shapes in order to call the overridden functions in the concrete
classes.
We simply loop through the vector and call the functions.
You might be thinking isn't this the same as we did before.
Yes since we must use inheritance in pure virtual functions it's interfaces in C++.
But there's another difference and I'll show you that example in code let's head over to the idea now
and we'll see.
OK so I'm back in the IDM in the section 16 workspace in the interface's dash start project.
We're going to do eventually is to implement that printable interface so that we're able to print any
kind of class objects on a stream any kind of class objects that conform to the printable interface.
So let's use this account hierarchy as a starting point.
This is similar to what we did in the previous sections challenge I've gotten rid of a lot of the other
stuff that's not necessary but let's just look at the key elements here.
Here we've got a classic count right here and you can see that we have a friend function that overloads
the insertion operator.
It expects an output stream and an account object by reference.
Perfect.
Now we're going to implement that.
We're going implement that right here.
You can see that it's obviously a friend is not a member of the class and it expects an account.
So if we have an account object and we put it on a stream this should fire and print it out and that
absolutely works.
And all it does is just says account display.
Ok so now let's look at a checking account.
You can see the checking kind of doing the same thing where we do we're duplicating this code all over
the place and it's right here.
There's my checking account.
It is an account.
Well I've got to do this now with a checking here so I'm implementing it over here.
So this definitely works with the checking account and the displays checking display.
The reason that we have to do this is because a friend functions are not inherited.
So even though I've got this guy appear I am not getting him down here or further down the hierarchy.
So that's one issue.
The other issue is that in order for us to implement this operate operator the insertion OPERATOR It
really doesn't make sense for it to be a member function.
Remember if it was a member function I'd need the object on the left followed by insertion operator
and then the stream.
Well that's not how we do it right.
We're doing something like stream object.
So this really would work for sure but it would feel really clunky and nobody would ever use it.
So we've run into a problem now.
We're doing the same for the savings account class right here and the trust account class right here.
So that's all we're doing is we're just creating these four classes overloading the insertion operator
for each one of them and each one of them will display you know savings display trust display and so
forth.
So we can have a simple main and this is what main looks like right here.
Give me an account a put it on the stream give me an account see.
Same thing same thing you get the idea.
A C S T we should see a display checking display Selby's display trust display.
So let's run that and be sure this works.
And that's what we get we've got our four objects the account the checking the savings the trusts everything
works like it should.
But it really doesn't.
There's one problem here and that me copy some code that I've already written in here just to save a
little time.
So here's the code we've got now we've got P1 is a pointer to an account right.
That's a base class pointer and I'm creating an account and pointing to it from P1 and then I'm going
to put the object 20 to dereference P. one because one is a pointer.
I want the object Despoina to and I want to put that on the stream.
This will call the overloaded operator for the account.
Now I want to do the same thing with P2 except P2 this time he's actually pointing to a checking account
although again we're coming at it through a base class pointer and I want to dereference P2 and put
it on the stream.
So what we expect is to say a count display checking display but that's not what happens.
And let's see what happens.
You see what happens is a count display account display.
Why does this happen.
Well it happens because we've got no virtual functions going on right.
The only virtual functions we've got are close this down so you can see it exactly.
Let's go up to my account class and the only virtual functions we've got are withdraw.
Right.
That's it.
That's the only virtual function we have.
We have no virtual function that's going to allow us to work with any kind of account object in the
context of this operator here and it's really clunky to do so because of the syntax so what we could
do is we could certainly add some kind of print function to this account class and it's inherited all
the way down and make it virtual.
And that's kind of what we'll do.
But what we'll do is we'll create a separate interface class rather than put all the stuff in account.
And what that buys us is that not only am I able to use that principal interface class that we want
to create with this account hierarchy.
I can use it with any kind of class not just these account classes.
So let's do that.
What I'm going to do is I'm going to switch over to the interfaces dash complete project.
Right now it looks just like this one but what we'll do is we'll modify and get this working with the
printable interface.
Ok so I'm back in the interface's dash complete project and you can see that right now that's exactly
what we did earlier.
I haven't changed this code at all.
So this is exactly what was in interface's dash start.
So we want to do is we want to create an interface class called printable or I printable.
We want to define a virtual function in there and then we want to extend it so it makes more sense and
it works better.
So first thing we're going to do is we're going to clean up this mess that we've got going on here.
So I'm going to delete all these friend functions right here and I'm going to lead their implementations
as well so I'm going to get rid of the account one.
And this will definitely clean up our code a lot.
I'll get rid of this guy right here.
I'll get rid of that implementation for the checking account.
I'll get the one in savings and I'll delete the implementation for the savings.
And then finally we'll do the same for trust so I'll get rid of that and I'll get rid of this as well.
OK so now we've got a much cleaner look.
Let me scroll way up here.
So what we have now is the account class with its virtual void withdraw virtual destructor checking
with its virtual void withdraw virtual destructor and so forth.
So it would a really clean place to start.
So what do we do.
Well the first thing we want to do is we want to create that printable class interface so let's do that.
And of course you would normally do this in header files and not CPV files.
But I'm going to do it all in one just so it's easier and I don't have to switch between files to be
able to explain this.
So this do that so we'll create a class called this just call it principle you can call it with or without
that it's really up to you.
So that's my class and I'll close it off down here.
And what do I want in this class.
Well I need a friend rent a have to have a friend because of the way that insertion operator works where
the left side is the stream and the right side is the object.
I really can't have member functions that do that kind of thing.
So what I want to do is I want to have a friend function that's very similar to the ones we had before.
So let's say friend and it's going to return a pseudo stream by reference we're going to overload the
insertion operator and the two parameters are the pseudo stream and the printable object.
That's where things really change.
So that's create the studio stream by reference and Konst I printable object by reference
we just call that LBJ or our right hand side would be like.
So that's my function prototype.
And now what we want is we want to have a public pure virtual function that all classes that conform
to this interface must implement.
That's the one that's going to allow them to put whatever they want on the stream however they want.
So in this case it will be virtual in a safe way and will call it print we can call it anything we like
and we're going to put stuff I don't know stream.
This should be Konst since we really don't want to modifying any objects.
And here's the important piece.
That's a pure virtual function there.
OK so now let's implement that front function.
Copy this.
So I don't have to type it all out again.
And what we want this function to do is really pretty straightforward.
Or we want this function to do is do that say Oh B.J..
Right that's the object and we want to print onto that stream.
That's the virtual function that all of my concrete classes must implement.
And then I just simply return the stream.
That's it.
Now let us see what's happening here.
This function gets called with a printable or an printable.
And it's going to call print on that object.
So this will go.
We're coming at it with a baseline reference right if you will because they're all going to be printable
and we're going to use dynamic polymorphism to match the appropriate one.
So that's really all we need to do here.
So that's a really really simple class interface.
We only need to do this with the account class because we've got a hierarchy here.
But another way to do it is well a second.
So we could say public eye principle.
So now we're saying that that account class conforms to this principle protocol which means that it
must implement this guy right there that virtual void function.
So we can do that right here.
We could say virtual void print.
Right.
It expects a pseudo stream
by reference we can call it OS and it is a Konst method.
And I want to override it definitely put that in there sort of the compiler can help me in case I messed
up.
That's it.
And what do we do here.
We just simply say oh yes count this just say display.
That's it.
That's all we have to do.
Now for all the other classes that are derived from this account class what we need to do is implement
that virtual function in them in whatever way makes sense to display a checking account in this case
I'll just say checking right.
In this case I'll just say savings.
But again whatever makes sense you want to display interest rates whatever whatever makes sense for
a display of a savings account and here will do the same thing with it.
With the trust account.
Ok that should do us enough we build and run.
You can see that we got what we wanted right.
There's the two pointers.
So the one that points to an accounting of displaying accounts display and P2 is pointings We're checking
and I'm getting checking display.
That's pretty cool.
And obviously these guys will still work since they're doing static binding so that's easy.
But here's the difference.
Again you might still be wondering you know so far so what.
Well the difference here is that suppose we want to create a class called Dog and that dog class wants
to be printable.
So would these derive from printable.
So all these dog class has to do is implement that interface.
So let's do that right here.
I'll say public and the interface is right up here I'll just copy this guy to save myself a little time.
That's the same function.
And how does a dog display itself or maybe the dog says Wolf Wolf.
Simple as that.
So now what I can do here is I can create a dog object
and I can do it dynamically.
So I need to put a pointer in there that's it.
Now I can simply put that dog object on the stream so I can cut and paste.
I'll copy from here.
And rather than the one this time it's dog.
I'm dereferencing dog.
And when I run now there you can see Wolf Wolf right there.
So that's pretty powerful.
The last thing is we can take it a step further and what we can do is we can actually write a function.
And I'll just copy it here so you can see what it would look like right here.
This is just a regular C++ function and it's called print.
And what does it expect it expects an eye printable so it will take anything or take a dog object an
account object a savings account object because they're all printable.
So again we could pass all of those guys into there to say I'm right here my dog.
I could say print and I can pass a dog into it and if I run that I should see Wolf Wolf twice.
And there you can see it right up here.
You could do the same thing with the objects.
This is where this is different from just regular inheritance from a base class.
In this case I can use this principle across hierarchy's across anything I want.
I could just say that whatever I'm creating is principal overload that print pure virtual function and
I'm good to go.
I'm a printable So remember in this case dog is a printable.
An account was a printable savings account was a principal a savings account was also an account.
This is a really good use case for it.